We don't know anything about Habakkuk's parents. We don't know anything about his circumstances in life, his death.
We don't know anything about Habakkuk, but what we do know is that he lived during a most stressful time
during the nation of Israel's history. The year was 628 to BCE.
Wicked King Jehoya. Jehoya Kim was ruling the son of Josiah.
That would be about 20 years before 607.
And verse 2 describes the conditions that Habakkuk and Jeremiah and others had to face in verse 2.
How long would Jehovah must I cry for help?
But you do not hear. How long must I ask for help from violence, but you do not intervene?
How stressful this must have been to Habakkuk. Jerusalem was no city of peace, rather a city of violence and bloodshed.
Verse 4. The wicked surrounds the righteous. The prophet Eirijah had to run away because of the wickedness. He was afraid.
He went down to Egypt. Jehoya Kim drags him back to Jerusalem and kills him.
And then Jehoya Kim, he hated Jeremiah, had seething hatred for that prophet.
He was a scary time to live in Jerusalem and Habakkuk had to do that. No wonder.
No wonder he poured out his heart to Jehovah. Why, Jehovah? Why?
Why don't you do something? Jerusalem, this is the city you chose. Your temple is here.
You had this temple built. The Davidic King is on the throne.
This is your city, Jehovah. Why don't you do something?
And Jehovah said, Habakkuk, I am doing something.
I am doing something. And he now goes on to show what he is doing. Yes, it is wicked times there.
But he shows now in verse 5 and 6, even as brother Thomas said,
that Babylonians are coming. The Caldians are coming.
And they are going to punish unfaithful Israelites, unfaithful ones.
And then in chapter 2, Habakkuk, Jehovah shows Habakkuk that Babylon itself will not escape punishment.
And it will be conquered by the Meads and the Persians in 539 BCE.
So amidst all of those problems, Habakkuk, I have my eye on you, Jehovah saying,
and on Jeremiah and Daniel and Ezekiel, these faithful ones, they're not going to be lost in the crowd.
I'll take care of you. However, in the meantime, be faithful, be patient.
And now in chapter 1, in fact, chapter 2, verse 3, Jehovah shows,
and it explains to Habakkuk exactly what he is doing as well.
Chapter 2 and verse 3.
The vision is yet for its appointed time.
It's rushing toward its end, and it will not lie, even if it should delay.
You see the vision, the destruction of Jerusalem, it is rushing toward its end.
It's eagerly moving forward toward its fulfillment, Habakkuk, and even if it should delay.
You'd be careful. In the imperfect mind, it might delay.
Maybe Habakkuk and others thought, well, didn't Isaiah say that Babylon was going to destroy Jerusalem?
That was 100 years ago. It didn't happen yet.
But it might delay in one's mind.
However, what does Jehovah say there in verse 3, the last sentence?
It will not be late. Habakkuk, it will not be late.
And in 20 years, 20 years later, in 607 BCE, Jerusalem was destroyed.
So any delay was a perceived delay due to imperfection.
607 BCE. Oh, it's easy for us. We look back in history.
We look back and we say from our standpoint, 607.
Of course it was 607.
That was a crucial date in Bible prophecy.
607 linked to the birth of God's kingdom in 1914.
607, the end of the Gentile, or it's beginning of the Gentile times.
We get it. But Habakkuk, Jeremiah and others, did not have the luxury of looking back retro-specatively and say,
it's going to be in 607.
No, Jehovah just said to them, it will not be late.
Your job, your work, be faithful, be patient.
I am doing something. That's what he's telling Habakkuk.
Same with us today, Armageddon. It's fixed.
It's predetermined the hour, the day it's coming.
It will not be late.
What do we do? Be patient. Be faithful.
We trust in Jehovah.
Now in verse 4, Jehovah gives Habakkuk tremendous encouragement and encouragement that is so practical for you and me today.
The last portion of verse 4, let's read that please.
But the righteous one, that's Habakkuk, will live by me, will live by his faithfulness.
The righteous one. That's you and me.
We are trying to be righteous. We want to hold to Jehovah's standards. We love Jehovah.
But now Jehovah says, just live by faithfulness. Live by faithfulness. What does that mean?
That statement is more important than ever before, faith.
The assured expectation of things that Jehovah says will come true.
The confidence and the conviction that everything Jehovah says is going to be in our best interests, faithful.
But we need to be faithful more than ever before because look at how Jehovah's allowed wickedness to increase proliferate.
It is so wicked today.
The websites that one can stumble into.
The wicked websites that can take one's spirituality away.
The more that Jehovah allows wickedness, violence, and so forth to proliferate on the earth, that's more of a test of our love for Him.
How deep is our devotion to Jehovah? How much do we love Him? What is in our hearts? It causes us to take a stand.
So being faithful is not simply a mental acknowledgement that I'm one of Jehovah's witnesses, no.
Rather being faithful means complete trust in Jehovah's promises and being firmly convinced that whatever Jehovah asks us to do is in our best interests.
Complete trust in Jehovah's promises and being firmly convinced, having this conviction that's being firmly persuaded, that whatever Jehovah asks us to do is in our best interests.
This point is so powerful that Paul quoted it three times in the Greek scriptures.
Faith. Over 500 times in the Bible, we could go on and on. That's how important this word faith is.
So that's what Jehovah now is telling a backup.
But now, chapter 3 and verse 2, how does one build confidence? How does one build faith? Chapter 3 and verse 2.
Oh, Jehovah, I've heard the report about you. This is what a backup did. He meditated on Jehovah and the reports about him.
What reports? Oh, the Red Sea, Jericho, 185,000 Assyrians killed and Hezekiah's Day. These were reports of a backup meditated on.
And it built his confidence in Jehovah. And he says, I'm an all of Jehovah of your activity. Jehovah's activity is fear inspiring.
That's what it does for us too. When we meditate on all that Jehovah has done for his people today, the fulfillment of prophecies.
No wonder, Habakkuk said, in the midst of the years, bring it to life. Bring it back to your Father. Bring it back.
I'm confident you will revive your activity in behalf of faithful ones. And that's again our prayer.
In spite of the difficult conditions, Habakkuk lived in and had to face.
After meditating on Jehovah's activity, Habakkuk was moved to utter what may be one of the most memorable expressions ever expressed.
An expression of confidence ever expressed by a human. And that's in verse 18 of chapter 3.
For me, I will exalt in Jehovah. And I will be joyful in the God of my salvation. In spite of the challenges, this means literally jump for joy.
I'm going to spin around. I'm going to spin around in my love for you and joy for you, my delight in God. What a beautiful expression of confidence that Habakkuk had.
Habakkuk disappears from the account, but his message remains. And that message is loud and clear for you and me today. Trust in Jehovah.
And when we do that, with our acts of worship, each time we trust in Jehovah and show him how much we love him, in spite of our problems, Jehovah's heart rejoices. And he loves our worship.
So in confidence, let us trust in Jehovah. Like Habakkuk, pour out our anxieties and concerns to our Heavenly Father.
Pay attention to prophecy. It will not be late. And above all, let's be patient. Let's be faithful as we wait on our God of salvation.